Sourcemap docs (#638)
parcel-bundler/website: src/plugin-system/source-maps.md

  order: 14
---

> Parcel utilizes the package `@parcel/source-maps` for all it's source-maps, this ensures performance and reliability when manipulating sourcemaps across plugins and Parcel's core. This library has been written from the ground up in C++ with manipulation and concatenation of these sourcemaps in mind and gave us a 20x performance improvement over our old solution consisting of Mozilla's Source-Map library and some internal utilities. This improvement in performance is mainly due to the optimizations in the data structures and way we cache the sourcemaps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parcel utilizes the package `@parcel/source-maps` for processing all source maps to ensure performance and reliability when manipulating source maps across plugins and Parcel's core. This library has been written from the ground up in C++ with both source map manipulation and concatenation in mind and gave us a 20x performance improvement over our old solution using Mozilla's [`source-map`](https://github.com/mozilla/source-map) library and some internal utilities. This improvement in performance is mainly due to optimizations in the data structures and the way in which we cache source maps.
```

## How to use the library

> To use the library you start of by creating an instance of the exported `SourceMap` class, once you've done that you can call various functions to add and edit mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the library, you start off by creating an instance of the exported `SourceMap` class, on which you can call various functions to add and edit source mappings.
```

> Below is an example with all the ways you can add mappings to a SourceMap instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example covering all ways of adding mappings to a `SourceMap` instance:
```

```js
import SourceMap from "@parcel/source-map";

let sourcemap = new SourceMap();

> // Each function that adds mappings, has optional offset arguments
> // these can be used to offset the generated mappings by a certain amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Each function that adds mappings has optional offset arguments.
// These can be used to offset the generated mappings by a certain amount.
```

sourcemap.addIndexedMappings(
  [
    {
      generated: {
        // line index starts at 1
        line: 1,
        // column index starts at 0
        column: 4,
      },
      original: {
        // line index starts at 1
        line: 1,
        // column index starts at 0
        column: 4,
      },
      source: "index.js",
      // Name is optional
      name: "A",
    },
  ],
  lineOffset,
  columnOffset
);

// Add raw mappings, this is what would be outputted into a vlq encoded source-map
sourcemap.addRawMappings(
  {
    file: "min.js",
    names: ["bar", "baz", "n"],
    sources: ["one.js", "two.js"],
    sourceRoot: "/the/root",
    mappings:
      "CAAC,IAAI,IAAM,SAAUA,GAClB,OAAOC,IAAID;CCDb,IAAI,IAAM,SAAUE,GAClB,OAAOA",
  },
  lineOffset,
  columnOffset
);

// Sourcemaps can be saved as buffers (flatbuffers), this is what we use for caching in Parcel.
// You can instantiate a SourceMap with these buffer values using the `addBufferMappings` function
let originalMapBuffer = new Buffer();
sourcemap.addBufferMappings(originalMapBuffer, lineOffset, columnOffset);
```

## Transformations/Manipulations

> If your plugin does any code manipulations it should ensure that it creates correct mappings to the original source-code to guarantee that we still end up creating an accurate source-map at the end of the bundling process. You are expected to return a `SourceMap` instance at the end of a transform in a [Transformer](/plugin-system/transformer/) plugin. We also provide the source-map from the previous transform to ensure you map to the original source code and not the output of the previous transform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your plugin does any code manipulations, you should ensure that it creates correct mappings to the original source code to guarantee that we still end up creating an accurate source map at the end of the bundling process. You are expected to return a `SourceMap` instance at the end of a transform in a [Transformer](/plugin-system/transformer/) plugin. We also provide the source 
 map from the previous transform to ensure you map to the original source code and not just the output of the previous transform.
```

The `asset` value that gets passed in the `parse`, `transform` and `generate` functions of a transformer plugin contains a function called `getMap()` and `getMapBuffer()`, these functions can be used to get a SourceMap instance (`getMap()`) and the cached SourceMap Buffer (`getMapBuffer()`).

You are free to manipulate the sourcemap at any of these steps in the transformer as long as you ensure the sourcemap that gets returned in `generate` maps to the original sourcefile correctly.

Below is an example on how to manipulate sourcemaps in a transformer plugin:

```js

> import { Transform } from "@parcel/plugin";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { Transformer } from "@parcel/plugin";
```

Author: this was copy-paste from the transformer docs, will update those as well in that case. Forgot I renamed it

import SourceMap from "@parcel/source-map";

> export default new Transform({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export default new Transformer({
```

      map,
    };
  },
});
```

If your compiler supports the option to pass in an existing sourcemap, you can also use that as it could result in more accurate/better sourcemaps than using the method in the previous example.

An example of how this would work:

```js
import { Transform } from "@parcel/plugin";
import SourceMap from "@parcel/source-map";

export default new Transform({
  // ...

  async generate({ asset, ast, resolve, options }) {
    // Get the original map from the asset
    let originalMap = await asset.getMap();
    let compilationResult = dummyCompiler(await asset.getAST(), {
      // Pass the VLQ encoded version of the originalMap to the compiler
      originalMap: originalMap.toVLQ(),
    });

    // In this case the compiler is responsible for mapping to the original positions provided in the originalMap
    // so we can just convert it to a Parcel SourceMap and return it
    let map = new SourceMap();
    if (compilationResult.map) {
      map.addRawMappings(compilationResult.map);
    }

    return {
      code: compilationResult.code,
      map,
    };
  },
});
```

## Concatenating sourcemaps in Packagers

> If you're writing a custom packager, it's your responsibility to concatenate the sourcemaps of all the assets while packaging the assets. This is done by creating a new sourcemap instance using `new SourceMap()` and adding new mappings to it using the `addBufferMappings(buffer, lineOffset, columnOffset)` function. The lineOffset should be equal to the line index at which the asset output starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're writing a custom packager, it's your responsibility to concatenate the sourcemaps of all the assets while packaging the assets. This is done by creating a new `SourceMap` instance and adding new mappings to it using the `addBufferMappings(buffer, lineOffset, columnOffset)` function. `lineOffset` should be equal to the line index at which the asset output starts.
```

    bundle.traverse((node) => {
      if (node.type === "asset") {
        // Get the data from the queue results
        let { code, mapBuffer } = results[i];

        // Add the output to the contents
        let output = code || "";
        contents += output;

        // If Parcel requires sourcemaps we add the mapBuffer to the map
        if (options.sourceMaps) {
          if (mapBuffer) {
            // we add the mapBuffer to the map with the lineOffset
            // The lineOffset is equal to the line the content of the asset starts at
            // which is the same as the contents length before this asset was added
            map.addBufferMappings(mapBuffer, lineOffset);
          }

          // We add the amount of lines of the current asset to the lineOffset
          // this way we know the length of `contents` without having to recalculate it each time
          lineOffset += countLines(output) + 1;
        }

        i++;
      }
    });

    // Return the contents and map so Parcel Core can save these to disk or get post-processed by optimizers
    return { contents, map };
  },
});
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe a short paragraph that for more complicated situations where packaging happens on an AST level, it works similar to the transformer?

Author: Sure will add that in

> ## PostProcessing sourcemaps in Optimizers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Postprocessing source maps in optimizers
```

> Using sourcemaps in optimizers is identical to how you use it in Transformers as you get one file as input and are expected to return that same file as output but optimized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using sourcemaps in optimizers is identical to how you use it in transformers as you get one file as input and are expected to return that same file as output but optimized.
```

> Using sourcemaps in optimizers is identical to how you use it in transformers as you get one file as input and are expected to return that same file as output but optimized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using source maps in optimizers is identical to how you use it in transformers as you get one file as input and are expected to return that same file as output but optimized.
```

> The only difference with optimizers is that the map is not provided as part of an asset but rather as a separate parameter/option as you can see in the code snippet below. As always the map is an instance of the Parcel SourceMap class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only difference with optimizers is that the map is not provided as part of an asset but rather as a separate parameter/option as you can see in the code snippet below. As always, the map is an instance of the `SourceMap` class.
```

```js
// The contents and map are passed separately
async optimize({ bundle, contents, map }) {
  return { contents, map }
}
```

## Diagnosing issues

> If you encounter incorrect mappings and want to debug these mappings we have built tools that can help you diagnose these issues, this includes a specific reporter (`@parcel/reporter-sourcemap-visualiser`) to create a `sourcemap-info.json` file with all the necessary information to visualize all the mappings and source content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you encounter incorrect mappings and want to debug these mappings we have built tools that can help you diagnose these issues. By running a specific reporter (`@parcel/reporter-sourcemap-visualiser`), Parcel create a `sourcemap-info.json` file with all the necessary information to visualize all the mappings and source content.
```

> For it to work you can add a custom `.parcelrc`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable it, add a custom `.parcelrc`:
```

```json
{
  "extends": "@parcel/config-default",
  "reporters": ["...", "@parcel/reporter-sourcemap-visualiser"]
}
```

> After the reporter has created the `sourcemap-info.json` file you can upload it to the [sourcemap visualizer](https://sourcemap-visualiser.now.sh/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the reporter has created the `sourcemap-info.json` file, you can upload it to the [sourcemap visualizer](https://sourcemap-visualiser.now.sh/)
```

    bundle.traverse((node) => {
      if (node.type === "asset") {
        // Get the data from the queue results
        let { code, mapBuffer } = results[i];

        // Add the output to the contents
        let output = code || "";
        contents += output;

        // If Parcel requires sourcemaps we add the mapBuffer to the map
        if (options.sourceMaps) {
          if (mapBuffer) {
            // we add the mapBuffer to the map with the lineOffset
            // The lineOffset is equal to the line the content of the asset starts at
            // which is the same as the contents length before this asset was added
            map.addBufferMappings(mapBuffer, lineOffset);
          }

          // We add the amount of lines of the current asset to the lineOffset
          // this way we know the length of `contents` without having to recalculate it each time
          lineOffset += countLines(output) + 1;
        }

        i++;
      }
    });

    // Return the contents and map so Parcel Core can save these to disk or get post-processed by optimizers
    return { contents, map };
  },
});
```

> ### Concatenating ASTs

Author: Added this section as requested, didn't go very in depth as this is probably something for the Packager docs, mainly just touched that it works similar to the Transformer and the risk of losing mappings when doing lots of modifications. The mapping side of things is very simple though, it's just compile turn into SourceMap object and return

Reviewer: 👍  I just wanted it to mention that this is also a common approach
